Hey, welcome back. On today's episode — a musician named Lea Mck gets pulled onstage by Riley Green mid-set for an impromptu duet, and Suno's AI songs just landed inside iMessage. Then in the Deep Dive: does cheaper video gear actually change who tells rural stories, or does it just move the same old gatekeepers onto a new screen? That and more, coming right up.
Welcome to Cariboo Signals, an AI-generated review of the latest tech news and ideas that impact our rural communities — I'm Riley. It's Monday, July 20th, 2026. Coming to you from the Cariboo, on lands that have been cared for by the Secwépemc, Tŝilhqot'in, and Dakelh peoples since time immemorial. Today's theme is Arts, Culture & Digital Storytelling.
And I'm Casey. Today we're looking at who's actually making the pictures and music that represent rural places, and who's just along for whatever platform happens to be popular this year.
Quick weather check before we get into it — Horsefly Lake is sitting at 11 degrees with overcast skies, high of 25 expected, low of 10 tonight, and tomorrow looks partly cloudy. Around the region: 100 Mile House at 10 with clear skies, Williams Lake at 12 and partly cloudy, Quesnel at 10 and clear, and out on the Chilcotin plateau, Redstone's at 8 with mainly clear conditions.
Let's get into today's stories.
There's a nonprofit called Current AI trying to build what they're calling the World Wide Web of AI — open, freely available models meant to work across languages and cultures instead of being locked inside one company's product. TechCrunch reports they've made real progress across devices, chat tools, and multilingual systems, and the pitch is explicitly cultural: AI that doesn't flatten every language and dialect into whatever the dominant training data happened to favor.
Free is the pitch. Who maintains it in five years is the question nobody in that article answers.
Right behind that story is a fight over who gets paid when AI touches culture at all — X and several music publishers just quietly settled a copyright lawsuit that's been running since 2023, over Twitter, now X, hosting thousands of instances of unlicensed music without ever paying rights holders.
Quietly settled usually means neither side wanted anyone doing the math in public on what it actually cost.
And Suno, the AI music generator, just landed inside iMessage, so instead of recording a voice memo, you can now type a prompt and get a fully rendered AI song dropped straight into a text thread with friends. Full disclosure — Suno generated the theme song you heard at the top of this very episode.
Convenient, and also the exact tool music publishers are suing platforms over on behalf of human songwriters — that tension doesn't resolve, it just changes rooms.
Stranger territory next — an engineering student demonstrated that coil whine, that annoying high-pitched buzz your laptop or power supply makes, can actually be composed into recognizable music. Tom's Hardware ran the video, and it's a genuinely clever bit of electronics work — tuning what's normally noise pollution into something closer to a synthesizer. Related idea, different medium: Hackaday covered a project using chromatography, the old chemistry-class technique of separating a mixture with paper or powder, as an actual visual art form, producing striking abstract color-band images from nothing but basic lab materials.
Two different fields, same lesson — byproducts nobody designed for become somebody's medium, no grant or platform deal required.
On the lighter end, Kagi's Small Web newsletter shared "Wagon Wheel" by Old Crow Medicine Show as its song of the day, tied to a prompt about the feeling of being homesick — which, for anyone who's driven Highway 97 away from the Cariboo for a stretch, probably lands harder than intended. And Kottke.org flagged an essay from music critic Ted Gioia arguing that works like the Odyssey were never meant to be read silently — they were composed as music and rhythm, chanted and performed, and only became "literature" centuries after the fact.
Worth sitting with, given how much of what we now call content assumes silent scrolling instead of listening out loud around a fire or in a hall.
Closer to something with real Cariboo texture — Eagle Feather News covered a young musician named Lea Mck who got pulled up on stage by headliner Riley Green during Craven Country Thunder for an impromptu duet in front of a massive crowd. It's the kind of once-in-a-lifetime break that used to require an agent and a foot already in the door — now it sometimes just requires being noticed from the front row.
Or requires the headliner noticing you, which is still luck — just a different flavor of luck than it used to be.
Also in the "internet did something weird" category — Boing Boing reported an Amazon Web Services billing bug that turned a five-cent-a-month hobby account into a running tab of two-and-a-half billion dollars overnight, before Amazon caught and corrected it.
The Verge has two lighter items to flag as well. Musician Kieran Hebden, known as Four Tet, released a side project under a name that's literally an unpronounceable string of glyphs — deliberately unsearchable, deliberately resistant to algorithm-friendly branding. And separately, dozens of high school teams just began a grueling five-day, six-hundred-thirty-mile road race across Texas in solar-powered cars they designed and built themselves.
Something with real stakes for how we all get to speak online — OpenMedia is intervening at the Supreme Court of Canada in a case about free expression on the internet, arguing the ruling could set precedent well beyond Canada's borders even though it's being heard here.
Free expression cases always sound abstract until you ask who loses access first when a ruling goes the wrong way — historically, that's smaller, less-resourced voices, which includes most rural and independent media.
And on that exact thread — IndigiNews profiled its 2026 ReFocus fellows, a cohort of Indigenous photojournalists who trained together over a week in Kjipuktuk, Halifax, and are now equipped to tell their own communities' stories through their own lens, rather than waiting for an outside outlet to parachute in.
That's the model that actually answers the "who tells the story" question directly — training the storytellers themselves, not just handing out cheaper cameras and hoping.
We'll pick that thread back up in the Deep Dive. Also today, the BC Wildfire Service is responding to thirteen out-of-control wildfires across the Cariboo Fire Centre right now, so if you're anywhere near an active zone, keep checking official evacuation channels rather than social media rumors.
And The Tyee has a piece on BC communities, from Terrace to Kamloops, trying to work out how to regulate the data centres AI companies want to build in their backyards, with locals raising real questions about power draw, water use, and who actually benefits. Different infrastructure fight than the wildfires, but the same underlying question: who's accountable once the initial announcement fades and the thing is just running in the background of daily life.
That's the roundup for today.
Today's spotlight goes to the Central Cariboo Arts and Culture Society. They run the Arts Centre, manage local grants programs, and put on Performances in the Park — free live music every Thursday evening this summer at Boitano Park. No ticket, no cover, just folding chairs and whoever's playing that week. It's the kind of low-barrier event that actually gets people outside listening to local musicians instead of scrolling past them on a screen. Check centralcaribooarts.com for this week's lineup.
It's also, not incidentally, exactly the kind of small recurring event that's easy to document with almost no equipment at all — which matters for what we're about to get into, since it's also easy for someone to be pointing a camera at rural life and see where that goes.
Tools getting cheaper is the obvious part of this story. The real question is whether streaming economics and algorithmic distribution actually change who gets to make moving pictures about rural places, or whether they just relocate the same gatekeepers onto a different screen.
My instinct says relocate, not remove. A camera costs less than it used to. Getting anyone to actually watch what you shoot with it costs the same as ever — arguably more, given how crowded every feed is now.
Except that's not entirely true anymore. There's a comedian named Connor Ratliff who built a genuine following doing exhaustive video essays and threads on pop culture — deep dives on entire cartoon catalogs, entire discographies, hundreds of entries long — with no broadcaster, no distributor, just direct-to-audience long-form work released on his own schedule. That distribution model simply didn't exist twenty years ago, and it works without institutional backing behind it.
Ratliff also spent years inside the industry first — improv credits, acting work, a recognizable voice before he ever built that following on his own. The tool didn't create his audience. His pre-existing name recognition did most of the work.
Granted, but the underlying mechanism still matters. A creator can now build authority through sheer volume and specificity, not through a network executive picking them out of a stack of pitches. That's structurally different from the broadcast era, where you needed a commissioning editor's approval before a single frame of your work ever reached an audience.
The mechanism changed. The bottleneck moved — it didn't disappear. Now it's the algorithm deciding whose video essay about rural life surfaces next to a thousand others posted the same day. Suno alone is pumping AI-generated songs into iMessage threads at a volume no individual human creator can match. That's not a level playing field. That's a flood, and floods don't favor the small boat.
The sharper version of that argument is this: it's not access to tools that's the constraint, it's attention getting diluted by synthetic volume. A rural documentary maker in Quesnel isn't competing against other documentary makers anymore. They're competing against an infinite stream of machine-generated filler that costs its creator essentially nothing to produce and upload.
Right. And meanwhile CBC still exists in that same feed, backing filmmakers like Clement Virgo — whose new film "Steal Away" is getting real marketing push and critical attention right now — with budgets a self-distributed rural creator will never see. His work gets algorithmic promotion partly because a broadcaster paid for visibility, not because the algorithm is some neutral arbiter of quality.
Marketing spend still buys visibility, no argument there. But it doesn't buy the *only* path in anymore, the way it once did. IndigiNews training a full cohort of Indigenous photojournalists through their ReFocus program is the live counter-example — that's building the storytellers directly, skipping the broadcaster relationship altogether. They train together for a week, then each fellow goes home able to distribute work under their own name, on their own terms.
Training a photojournalist is a different exercise than training a filmmaker who needs sound design, editing capacity, and hours nobody's paying for. Stills are one person with a camera and a good eye. A documentary is a small crew and a real timeline. The skill floor for moving pictures sits higher than the skill floor for a strong photo essay, and that gap doesn't close just because the camera got cheaper.
Moving-image work genuinely does need more hands than a photo series, granted. But single-operator documentary is more viable now than it was five years ago. Lightweight mirrorless cameras, on-device editing software, platforms like YouTube or Vimeo that don't require a distribution deal to reach anyone. The barrier that's left isn't the gear anymore. It's whether anyone local is actually pointed at the subject in the first place.
Which loops back to that coil-whine and chromatography pairing, in an odd way — those are people finding meaning in what's already sitting around them, no funding required, no pitch meeting needed. Nobody needed a grant to notice their laptop hums a tune. The equivalent for rural film would be somebody just deciding to point a camera at a Thursday night in Boitano Park and actually finishing the edit instead of letting the footage sit on a hard drive.
(wry) The great rural documentary graveyard — more raw footage than finished films, in my experience.
(chuckles) Fair, but that's a genuinely underused move, and it's not theoretical — a fifteen-minute short about one Performances in the Park evening, the setup, the crowd filtering in, one musician's backstory, costs almost nothing to produce and already has a built-in local audience before it's even finished shooting.
It has a built-in audience of maybe two hundred people who were already standing there. It doesn't have a built-in audience beyond the Cariboo unless something else does the work of surfacing it — a festival programmer, a platform's recommendation engine, a broadcaster willing to pick it up. So we're back to the same wall we keep running into.
Not entirely the same wall, though. A Williams Lake or Quesnel short doesn't need a national audience to justify its existence. It needs a regional one that recognizes itself on screen — and that audience is reachable without a broadcaster at all, through community screenings, local Facebook groups, the Arts Centre's own mailing list and channels.
Regional reach without national distribution is a smaller, more honest goal. It's also not what streaming economics reward. Platforms pay per view at a rate that makes a two-hundred-person regional audience worth close to nothing financially — which means whoever's making that short is doing it as a hobby, not a livelihood, no matter how good the finished piece is.
Which gets at something real — the economic model and the storytelling value are two separate problems, and conflating them is where a lot of these conversations go sideways. A short film can matter enormously to a community and be worth close to zero dollars on a streaming platform at the exact same time. Those aren't contradictory facts. They're just describing two different systems.
Then the honest framing isn't "streaming democratizes rural film." It's "streaming is largely irrelevant to rural film's actual value, and everyone keeps pitching it as democratization because the platforms are free to use and that sounds better in a press release."
Streaming platforms are useful as a hosting and reach mechanism, not as an economic engine — those are genuinely two different jobs, and rural creators can use the free hosting without expecting it to also pay their rent.
That's a cleaner distinction than most of these pitches make. It also means the actual infrastructure question isn't which app to upload footage to. It's whether a community owns a screening or distribution channel it fully controls, instead of depending on YouTube's recommendation engine to decide, on any given week, who ever sees local work.
A concrete thing worth testing, actually. The Arts Centre already runs Performances in the Park as a live event with a built-in audience every Thursday. If they filmed even a handful of those nights and hosted the footage somewhere the Society itself controls — its own site, its own archive — that's a small, owned collection that doesn't depend on an algorithm's mood that particular week, or that particular year.
An owned archive doesn't solve discovery beyond the region — nobody outside the Cariboo stumbles onto a self-hosted video the way they might stumble onto something YouTube pushes into a recommendation feed. But it does solve the dependency problem: the footage exists whether or not any platform ever chooses to surface it. That's a different situation than the mocap conversation a few weeks back, where the missing piece was adoption — nobody local had picked up the tool at all. Here the tool and the subject both already exist, every single Thursday. The missing piece is someone deciding to point the camera and keep the file somewhere the Society itself owns, permanently.
Which is a genuinely different kind of gap than funding or gear. It's a governance and ownership question — who holds the footage, who decides where it lives, who can pull it down or lose the account password — not a "we need another grant" question at all.
(wry) Every rural archive's greatest enemy is a forgotten login from 2019, not a lack of funding.
Someone should actually put that question to the Central Cariboo Arts and Culture Society directly — whether Performances in the Park has ever been filmed with any intention of building an owned archive, or whether every single night simply disappears into memory once the last chord fades and everyone packs up their chairs.
There's also a version worth testing beyond music nights — the IndigiNews model of training a small cohort together, rather than handing one person a camera and hoping. A single evening workshop, even informally organized through the Arts Centre, on basic documentary shooting and editing, would do more for local film capacity than any individual piece of cheap gear ever will.
Agreed, and that's a genuinely different resolution than where these conversations usually land. It's not about money. It's about whether a handful of people learn the skill together, and whether the resulting footage ends up somewhere the community actually controls.
We didn't land on agreement about whether streaming changes the fundamentals for rural filmmakers — my read is the attention economy still rewards scale over specificity, full stop. But the ownership question is the one worth chasing next: who holds the actual footage of Cariboo life once the moment's already passed, not who has a platform account.
That's the forward-leaning version I'd take from this too — the tools and the subject already exist every Thursday in Boitano Park, so the next real move is someone deciding to point the camera and keep the file. If you've got an answer to Casey's question about that archive, or a story tip on who's actually filming what around here, send it to feedback at cariboo signals dot c-a.
And if my skepticism about the algorithm turns out wrong, that's the address to prove it. Have a good one out there.
Have a great rest of your day, and see you next time.